Add dp3 paper to version control (#19)
wkalt/dp3: doc/paper/paper.tex

\hyphenpenalty=10000
\lstset{
	basicstyle=\small\ttfamily,
	columns=flexible,
	breaklines=true,
	breakatwhitespace=true
	}
	\usepackage[letterpaper,top=2cm,bottom=2cm,left=3cm,right=3cm,marginparwidth=1.75cm]{geometry}
	\newcommand{\q}[1]{``#1''}

	\title{dp3: multimodal log database}
	\author{
		Wyatt Alt
		\texttt{wyatt.alt@gmail.com}
		\and
		Jainil Ajmera
		\texttt{jainil@berkeley.edu}
		}

		\begin{document}
		\maketitle

		\begin{abstract}
			dp3 is a multimodal log database for robotics data infrastructure, with goals
			to support low-latency playback, timeseries analytics, precomputed
			multigranular field-level statistical summaries, and efficient integration with
			distributed compute under a single system.

			The first section of this paper will introduce key concepts, background, and
			problems to solve in the multimodal logging domain. The second section will
			present the architecture of dp3.
		\end{abstract}

		\section{Introduction}
		dp3 is a row-oriented multimodal log database structured around a
		time-partitioned copy-on-write tree, which is stored in S3-compatible storage
		and fronted by an in-memory cache of inner tree nodes. The tree structure is

> 		heavily inspired by btrdb \cite{Andersen}. It is designed for robotics data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		heavily inspired by btrdb \cite{Andersen}. It is designed to support storing and retrieving robotics data with three \q{user personas} in mind:
```

		infrastructure with
		three \q{user personas} in mind:

		The \textbf{robotics developer}, whose primary workload consists of
		alternating between searches for interesting log events and doing replay-based
		analysis of those events using a tool like Foxglove \cite{foxglove}, or
		possibly replaying logs through their software stack.

> 		The \textbf{ML developer}, whose primary workload consists of large-scale compute

Reviewer: More common term of art i think
```suggestion
		The \textbf{Data Scientist}, whose primary workload consists of large-scale compute
```

		jobs against narrow selections of topics.

		The \textbf{data infrastructure admin}, who is responsible for administering the
		database and satisfying the other two customers in a cost-effective and
		maintainable manner.

		One person may of course assume multiple personas.

		For the robotics developer, dp3 provides low-latency playback for data recorded
		by a \q{producer} from a point in time on a selection of \q{topics}, as well as a
		query language for ergonomic expression of the \q{as-of join} type conditions
		allowing the user to quickly pivot between searching for interesting events,
		and replaying those events in full context.

> 		For the ML developer, dp3 supports both client/server and embedded modes of

Reviewer: These aren't defined clearly IMO - is there a way to put this that does not introduce new terms?

Author: this is still outstanding

		infrastructure. High latencies in playback and search are a direct
		impediment to product development speed.

		\textbf{Different scales of volume.} Depending on what kind of data the user
		is logging, multimodal data volumes can be orders of magnitude larger
		than server application log volumes for the same organization. Large
		producers may produce hundreds of terabytes or petabytes of logs per day.
		This makes it relatively more important for administrators to have a
		clear understanding of data access patterns, and granular control over
		data retention.

		\textbf{Support for distributed compute.} Typical server log databases do not
		expect you to run distributed compute jobs on your log data and are not
		designed with that use-case in mind, whereas in multimodal log management
		it is a core workload.

		\textbf{Support for statistical aggregates.} Multimodal logs are logs, but in
		a lot of cases they are also similar to metrics. For some kinds of logs
		it is attractive to be able to plot statistical aggregates such as
		quantiles or averages of field values over selected windows of time. To
		drive a responsive interface these aggregations must rely on

> 		precomputation, similar to how datadog functions.

Author: replace "how datadog functions" with something more clear

		joins. While we compile these queries to our own execution logic, the binding
		of the language to dp3 is not very tight, and there would be no conceptual
		barrier to instead compiling to e.g Clickhouse SQL in a way that
		transparently handles the quirks of Clickhouse for the user and results in a
		statement that should execute efficiently. This could be a useful extension
		strategy for a platform built on dp3.

		\section{Implementation}
		\subsection{Program architecture}
		\begin{figure}
			\begin{forest}
				for tree={
					draw,
					semithick,
					minimum height = 3ex,
					minimum width = 2em,
					grow = south,
					forked edge,
					s sep = 3mm,
					l sep = 6mm,
					fork sep = 3mm,
				}
				[router
				[treemgr
				[rootmap
				[sql]]
				[versionstore
				[sql]]
				[walmgr
				[disk]]
				[nodestore
				[cache]
				[S3]]]]
			\end{forest}
			\caption{Component structure of dp3}
			\label{modstructure}
		\end{figure}

		The component structure of dp3 is depicted in \autoref{modstructure}. This
		section will briefly outline the main data flows, and the following sections
		will explain components in greater detail.

> 		\subsubsection{Write path}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		\subsubsection{Write (import) path}
```

		While the rootmap is technically rebuildable from storage operations, it is
		essential for fast data access and effectively a central point of failure.

		The rootmap interface is fairly straightforward and should be portable to a
		range of database solutions:

		\textbf{Get(database string, producer string, topic string, version uint64)}
		gets a root for in a database a table at a version.

		\textbf{GetLatestByTopic(database string, producer string, topics
		map[string]uint64)} gets the latest roots in a database for a set of tables.
		The passed map of topics indicates minimum tree versions for each topic.

		\textbf{GetHistorical(database string, producer string, topic string)} gets
		all root versions in the database for a single table.

		\textbf{Put(database string, producer string, topic string, version uint64,
		nodeID nodeID)} inserts a new root into the rootmap.

		One dp3 instance can contain multiple logical \q{databases}, allowing users to
		segregate simulation data from real-world data or maintain other such
		divisions. All operations against the rootmap are therefore scoped with a
		logical database identifier.

> 		Today, dp3 uses SQLite for the rootmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		Today, dp3 uses SQLite\cite{sqlite} to store the rootmap on disk.
```

		\subsection{Versionstore}
		For a single tree, writes must be versioned in monotonically increasing order
		to support range deletion as well as querying for new data since a prior read.

		The version store is backed by a persistent counter, from which reservations
		of one billion versions are taken at a time. On startup, a dp3 instance

> 		acquires a lock on the counter and increments it by a billion, thus reserving

Reviewer: When I was doing my thesis i was told not to use words for numbers over 10, consider `1*10^9` or 1,000,000,000. Also historical note - [very old british english speakers](https://web.archive.org/web/20170112163426/https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/explore/how-many-is-a-billion) sometimes complain that billion used to mean 1e12.

		from my-robot
		/topic1 as t1, /topic2 as t2
		where t1.field = "foo"
		or t2.field = "bar";
		\end{lstlisting}

		As-of join with where clause with condition on either child.
		\begin{lstlisting}
		from my-robot
		/topic1 as t1 precedes /topic2 as t2
		by less than 5 seconds
		where t1.field = "foo"
		or t2.field = "bar";
		\end{lstlisting}

		As-of join with immediate modifier.
		\begin{lstlisting}
		from my-robot
		/topic1 as t1
		precedes immediate /topic2 as t2
		where t1.field = "foo"
		or t2.field = "bar";
		\end{lstlisting}

		Reversal of scan order.
		\begin{lstlisting}
		from my-robot /topic desc;
		\end{lstlisting}

		These queries get compiled into a typical iterator-style query execution plan,
		and executed by repeatedly calling Next on a root executor node.

		The current operators we implement are \q{merge}, as-of join, scan, filter,
		limit, and offset. The merge operation is associated with the comma operator
		in the language grammar, and it executes an N-way streaming merge of
		time-ordered children through a binary heap. This is the same way a
		conventional RDBMS may implement an ordered union, when indexes exist on the
		ordering column.

> 		The asof join operations (precedes or succeeds keyword) are executed by first

Reviewer: consistency note: above it's called an as-of join

		to evaluate.

		\section{Discussion}

		\subsection{Related Work}
		The copy-on-write tree structure of dp3 borrows heavily from btrdb, a
		timeseries database for storing streams of high-frequency univariate floats.
		Comparing the two, btrdb is more of a "pure" timeseries database with a
		primary focus on analytics, while dp3 has a primary focus on row-oriented
		multivariate data playback and a secondary focus on analytics. Since btrdb is
		univariate, it is also effectively a column store and is able to make use of
		columnar compression techniques that are not available to dp3, which uses
		chunked zstd compression across rows.

		Another system that uses a similar storage scheme is Apache Iceberg
		\cite{iceberg}.  Iceberg is a table format specification rather than an
		implementation, but the format specifies a height-three copy-on-write tree
		consisting of metadata files, manifest lists, manifest files, and data files.
		The metadata is a JSON file storing a list of "snapshots" that reference
		manifest lists.  Manifest lists include summary information about manifest
		files, and manifest files contain a list of data files in Avro format.

> 		Iceberg has builtin support for Parquet, Avro, and ORC format data files. As

Author: built-in

		merging and as-of join operations, although those go by different names.

		CQL has a focus on continuous queries over unbounded data streams. CQL
		supports a \q{sliding window join} with the syntax 

		\begin{lstlisting}
		Select Istream(*)
		From S1 [Range 5 seconds], S2 [Range 10 seconds]
		Where S1.A = S2.A
		\end{lstlisting}

		in this example, a tuple from S1 will be sent to the output if it joins with
		a tuple in S2 from within a 10-second sliding window, and a tuple from S2 will
		be sent if it joins with a 5-second sliding window from S1.

		dp3 does not support this kind of bidirectional windowing today, but this
		query is pretty similar to what dp3 would express as

		\begin{lstlisting}
		from my-device
		S1 precedes S2 by less than 10 seconds
		where S1.field = "foo"
		and S2.field = "bar"
		\end{lstlisting}

		The concept of joining columns between tables in dp3 is not presumed to make
		sense today, because the fields of different tables are typically
		incomparable. However, support for this may become important as we develop
		more focus on subqueries.

		Continuous queries are also not supported in dp3 today, however we are set up

> 		fairly well to support them. The tree structure makes it very cheap to check

Author: we are set up fairly well.. simplify the sentence

		if there is any new data since the last time observed. This should make it
		simple to offer a \q{tail} operator as an alternative to scan, which will
		run continuously and watch the tree root for new tuples as they come in. The
		rest of the query plan should remain the same.

		In the SEQUIN language for the SEQ database, an as-of join is expressed in

> 		this way \cite{seq}

Author: this is rendering wrong, probably bad ref

		\subsection{Work remaining}
		Significant work remains, both in design validation and feature development, to
		get dp3 to a useful state.

		\subsubsection{Design validation}
		The largest outstanding design question relates to dp3’s choice to use MCAP as
		the data format in leaf storage. There are a few benefits to this choice:
		\begin{itemize}
			\item No transcoding required on ingestion or query.
			\item Automatically compatible with user’s own internal tooling
			\item Streaming playback is a row-oriented workload
			\item Automatically compatible with common robotics recording workflows
		\end{itemize}

		There are also drawbacks, primarily in the performance department:
		\begin{itemize}
			\item Columnar storage would realize better compression in general
			\item A standard columnar format may allow us to leverage an off-the-shelf
				query executor, and could probably support more performant queries for
				our search workload.
			\item Building generic systems on MCAP requires supporting query operations
				on multiple different binary encoding formats in place, which is tedious
				to implement and support, and may carry some performance risks.
		\end{itemize}

> 		Characteristics of our competing workloads complicate the question as well. If

Author: characteristics, competing, complicates, ... simplify

\documentclass[9pt,twocolumn]{article}
\usepackage[english]{babel}
\usepackage{listings}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage[edges]{forest}
\usepackage[backend=biber]{biblatex}
\bibliography{paper.bib}

% reproducible outputs
\pdfinfoomitdate=1
\pdftrailerid{}

\hyphenpenalty=10000
\lstset{
  basicstyle=\small\ttfamily,
  columns=flexible,
  breaklines=true,
  breakatwhitespace=true
  }
  \usepackage[letterpaper,top=2cm,bottom=2cm,left=3cm,right=3cm,marginparwidth=1.75cm]{geometry}
  \newcommand{\q}[1]{``#1''}

  \title{dp3: multimodal log database}
  \author{
    Wyatt Alt
    \texttt{wyatt.alt@gmail.com}
    \and
    Jainil Ajmera
    \texttt{jainil@berkeley.edu}
    }

    \begin{document}
    \maketitle

    \begin{abstract}
      dp3 is a multimodal log database for robotics data infrastructure, with goals
      to support low-latency playback, timeseries analytics, precomputed
      multigranular field-level statistical summaries, and efficient integration with
      distributed compute under a single system.

      The first section of this paper will introduce key concepts, background, and

>       problems to solve in the multimodal logging domain. The second section will

Reviewer 2: ~problems to solve~ challenges

      present the architecture of dp3.
    \end{abstract}

    \section{Introduction}
    dp3 is a row-oriented multimodal log database structured around a
    time-partitioned copy-on-write tree, which is stored in S3-compatible
    storage and fronted by an in-memory cache of inner tree nodes. The tree

>     structure is heavily inspired by btrdb \cite{Andersen}. It is designed for

Author: we mention btrdb in the other work section, can remove it here.

    storage and retrieval of robotics data with three \q{user personas} in
    mind:

    The \textbf{robotics developer}, whose primary workload consists of
    alternating between searches for interesting log events and doing replay-based
    analysis of those events using a tool like Foxglove \cite{foxglove}, or
    possibly replaying logs through their software stack.

    The \textbf{ML developer}, whose primary workload consists of large-scale compute
    jobs against narrow selections of topics.

    The \textbf{data infrastructure admin}, who is responsible for administering the
    database and satisfying the other two customers in a cost-effective and
    maintainable manner.

> 

Reviewer 2: Nice! I like the usage of personas here

    One person may of course assume multiple personas.

    For the robotics developer, dp3 provides low-latency playback for data recorded
    by a \q{producer} from a point in time on a selection of \q{topics}, as well as a

>     query language for ergonomic expression of the \q{as-of join} type conditions

Author: remove "type"

    allowing the user to quickly pivot between searching for interesting events,
    and replaying those events in full context.

    For the ML developer, dp3 supports both client/server and embedded modes of
    operation. The query executor may be embedded directly into jobs so that jobs
    can operate directly against S3. This isolates heavy and bursty ML-related read
    workloads from the comparatively lighter-weight streaming playback and
    summarization workloads supported by the database server, and reduces the cost
    and complexity of infrastructure management by eliminating the need to scale a
    database deployment in step with the job workloads.

>     Operational burden for the data infrastructure admin is minimized by offloading

Reviewer 2: For consistency, reword to "For the data infrastructure admin, operational burden is minmized / dp3 minimizes the operational burden..."?

    primary storage and index structure to S3 and allowing the admin to use S3

>     tooling (lifecycle policies, retention policies, etc) to govern the garbage

Reviewer 2: etc needs a period after

    MCAP format in the leaves of the tree, and streams MCAP out during playback.
    The messages recorded by the user are repackaged and compressed, but not
    otherwise transformed from their original encoding, making dp3’s output
    compatible with any internal log tooling the user has developed. Once dp3’s
    supported set of message encodings is expanded, it should be fully usable as a
    storage component by any ROS user.

    The first section of this paper will elaborate on some of the design goals and
    high-level context surrounding the project. The second section will describe
    the implementation of key components in greater detail.

    \section{Background}
    \subsection{Multimodal log management}
    In robotics, it is common to use the word \q{logging} to refer to the process of
    writing multimodal diagnostic messages to network or disk for followup
    analysis. Perhaps by intent, the term serves to emphasize the parallels with
    traditional server application logging, i.e applications log text, robots log
    point clouds.

    Server application log management platforms are plentiful and follow

>     well-established patterns. Some examples of these include Sumo logic

Author: Sumo Logic

    \cite{sumologic}, Datadog logging \cite{datadoglog}, and the log management
    interfaces of the three major cloud providers: Google Cloud Logging \cite{gcplog}, AWS
    Cloudwatch Logs \cite{cloudwatch}, and Azure Monitor Logs \cite{azlog}.

>     From the user’s point of view these log management solutions are mostly

Reviewer 2: "From the user's point of view" --> "From the user's point of view,"

>     interchangeable. The core interface consists of, (1) Search controls:

Reviewer 2: Since items in the list are separated by periods, I think we should format this as a list? Or use a comma to delimit items?

Author: I've gone back and forth on the formatting of the lists in the paper, and settled on inline here because I found it most attractive to look at. I will change the separators to commas or semicolons.

    dropdowns for error levels, date picking, application names, tags, and a text
    box for \q{advanced} searches in a limited query language. (2) A listing of
    log lines matching the search results in descending timestamp order. (3) A

>     \q{view in context} function, usually accessed by right-clicking a

Author: s/function/feature

    particular log line in the listing. This function will show the log line of
    interest highlighted (or \q{pinned}) in a wider scope, perhaps by dropping the
    search restriction. For instance if the original query was restricted to a
    single application, the \q{context} may now include all applications. This
    function is used for tracing cascading failures and events across services.

    Users of multimodal logs have a similar set of requirements, with additional
    challenges.

    First, there are more kinds of content-based search, such as geographical
    search, image similarity search, or other kinds of search unanticipated by
    the database designer (i.e UDFs), and perhaps a more frequent need to
    correlate multiple signals in a single search. The need for timestamp-based
    search controls and filtering on high-level dimensions remains as great as
    before.

    Second, the meaning of \q{listing log lines} or \q{filling a screen with

>     logs} becomes a lot less clear, and is an interesting question in user

Reviewer 2: --> "less clear and is an interesting" (no comma)

    interface design. Log lines can still be listed as JSON, with bytes-valued
    fields rendered in base64 or similar – but more creative approaches can
    likely do better by incorporating images, pointcloud visualizations, maps,
    audio, and more.

    Third, text rendering is clearly insufficient for the \q{view in context}
    function, which now represents replaying \q{what the robot saw} at the
    associated time. Instead of a pinned message in a larger resultset, \q{view
    in context} is implemented using a complex visualization application such as

>     Foxglove.

Author: cite foxglove

    Beyond these parallels, there are other points of divergence:

> 

Reviewer 2: The text below seems critical. I think we could benefit from having the motivation presented more clearly? This could probably be achieved with some rework / moving around

Reviewer 2: TL;DR; could we have the below text be more visible?

    \textbf{Different organizational profile.} Server application logs are
    generally browsed only by infrastructure teams and application
    administrators. The read activity on those databases is sparse and high
    latencies are tolerable. In a robotics development organization, a
    multimodal log database is a business-critical, user-facing service and
    may be depended on by most of the development team outside of
    infrastructure. High latencies in playback and search are a direct
    impediment to product development speed.

    \textbf{Different scales of volume.} Depending on what kind of data the user

>     is logging, multimodal data volumes can be orders of magnitude larger

Reviewer 2: Can we quantify/estimate the orders of magnitude?

    than server application log volumes for the same organization. Large
    producers may produce hundreds of terabytes or petabytes of logs per day.
    This makes it relatively more important for administrators to have a
    clear understanding of data access patterns, and granular control over
    data retention.

    \textbf{Support for distributed compute.} Typical server log databases do not
    expect you to run distributed compute jobs on your log data and are not
    designed with that use-case in mind, whereas in multimodal log management

>     it is a core workload.

Reviewer 2: "in multimodal log management, it is a core workload" (comma needed)

>     \textbf{Support for statistical aggregates.} Multimodal logs are logs, but

Reviewer 2: Reword for simplicity? "In many cases, multimodal logs are similar to metrics. It can (optional: then) be attractive to have the ability to plot..."

    in a lot of cases they are also similar to metrics. For some kinds of logs
    it is attractive to be able to plot statistical aggregates such as
    quantiles or averages of field values over selected windows of time. The
    APM portions of Datadog enable this kind of operation at low latency over

>     trillions or quadrillions of points. To drive a responsive interface these

Reviewer 2: trillions, quadrillions, etc. -> change to numbers (scientific notation or whatever the convention is)?

    aggregations must rely on precomputation.

>     Of course, it can be assumed that in some large organizations these concerns

Reviewer 2: Not sure this paragraph is needed. For brevity, we can move on to the next paragraph that dives into the challenges with large-scale multimodal log data (particularly seen with startups)

    all apply to server logs as well. Many organizations employ more infrastructure
    engineers than all the employees in the largest robotics company, and some of
    them undoubtedly produce petabytes of logs and analyze them with Kafka

>     \cite{kafka} or Spark \cite{spark}.

Author: distributed processing frameworks

>     \cite{kafka} or Spark \cite{spark}.

Reviewer 2: Not sure the above paragraph is needed. Can't we move on to the next paragraph directly?

    However, in multimodal logging these scales are hit by startup companies, and
    the scaling requirements are significantly a function of the product’s
    properties and requirements – i.e what kinds of sensors and how good the
    performance needs to be – while in contrast the scaling requirements of
    traditional log databases are generally driven by organizational scale – i.e
    how many thousands of internal microservices there are. Organizational scale is
    slower-growing because it usually requires some form of sustained business

>     success over years.

Reviewer 2: I feel that there are some untestable hypotheses in here. Could we shorten this to simply state the challenge(s) brought on by large scales of multimodal log data

    In terms of system mechanics, there are a few other common considerations to
    note in multimodal log data management and modeling. The data comes into the
    system in a multiplexed format, where inputs generally contain data from
    multiple topics comingled. This is the most efficient format for writers to
    write, which is usually the main consideration on the device.

    Within that mixed message stream there is a large amount of variation in size
    of individual messages, ranging from a few bytes to dozens of megabytes. In
    addition, the aggregate record volume for these applications can be very
    large - trillions or quadrillions of records.

    Due to the volumes, a system that stores compressed data files in S3-like
    storage may be the only practical solution, and in such storage systems there
    is no ability to do real random IO (only range requests). It is therefore
    important to structure the writes to storage so that readers can do as much
    sequential IO as possible. Since the data is accessed by topic, this means
    storing data in files split or partitioned by topic - unlike the input

>     format.

Reviewer 2: Overall, this section seems to have presented a number of different concepts. While interesting, I wonder if all this background is necessarily needed? If not, perhaps we can consider shortening this section a bit for clarity. Just a suggestion!

    \subsection{ROS and MCAP}
    dp3 integrates closely with two existing software projects: the ROS (Robot
    Operating System) ecosystem, and the MCAP log file format.

    ROS is a software framework frequently used in academia and industry for
    developing robotics applications. A ROS-based system is built from
    \q{nodes}, which are independent processes that communicate via
    \q{topics} in pub/sub fashion over a message bus. Nodes may be attached to

>     sensor drivers, or process the outputs of other nodes. ROS provides various

Reviewer 2: "sensor drivers or process" (no comma)

    along with extension support for writing your own nodes.

    The ROS project has recently completed a transition from ROS1 to ROS2
    \cite{ROS2}. One important aspect of this transition was a switch from a
    prescribed message serialization format (ros1msg) to a pluggable recording
    architecture where the user is free to choose whatever serialization they want.
    For example CDR \cite{cdr}, protobuf \cite{protobuf}, and flatbuffers
    \cite{flatbuffers} are common choices. Flexible message serialization is a
    benefit for users but a complication for tooling authors, who must support
    whatever format the user chooses instead of focusing on just one.

    MCAP is a container format for multimodal logging developed at Foxglove,
    intended to support the pluggable serialization goals of ROS2 while still
    standardizing format features such as time-based indexing, chunk compression,
    integrity checks, and efficient remote summarization. The goal of MCAP is to
    enable a shared ecosystem of multimodal log tooling in spite of the variation
    among organizations in message serialization choice. MCAP has been the

>     default log format of ROS2 since version \q{Iron Irwini}, released in May

Author: cite irwini

    2023.

    dp3 targets integration with MCAP because the ROS ecosystem, and by extension
    the MCAP ecosystem, is significantly populated by educational applications
    and early-stage startups in position to try new approaches to data
    management. Accordingly, dp3 is built around MCAP’s domain model:

    A \textbf{schema} is a named schema definition in a format consistent with the
    encoding format of the log’s messages.

    A \textbf{channel} is a logical stream of messages within a log file. A channel is
    associated with a schema, as well as a topic.

    A \textbf{topic} is a name for a logical data stream, for instance \q{/images}. Each
    channel has exactly one topic, multiple channels may have the same topic, and
    channels with the same topic may have different schemas (unusual in a single
    recording but common over time as an organization’s schemas evolve).

    A \textbf{message} associates a channel with an array of bytes, which encodes a
    message in the format described by the schema of the channel.

> 

Reviewer 2: Nice, easy-to-understand overview!

    \subsection{As-of joins}
    A central aspect of multimodal log search workloads is a similar operation to
    what some SQL dialects call an \q{as-of join}. The idea of an as-of join is
    to join records in one table with those in another based on a sequential or
    temporal relationship - for instance, join records in one table with the
    immediately preceding or succeeding records in another table, based on a
    timestamp column.

    As a result of the message-oriented architecture described in the previous
    section, these kinds of queries are common in robotics. For an example query,
    consider working on a self-driving car and needing to locate recent instances
    where the car was taking a left hand turn in the rain, with more than 10
    pedestrians present in an intersection, in order to debug some misbehavior
    that has been noticed. The log messages that would indicate the left turn,
    the rain, and the number of tracked pedestrians will likely occur on separate
    topics, at unaligned timestamps and different logging frequencies. This means

>     what you really need to understand is the cases where variously-defined

Reviewer 2: "you really need to understand" seems a bit...direct? Can reword to something more general and less direct.

    \q{adjacent} readings on these topics match your search criteria.

    As-of joins are a nonstandard SQL feature, and are not supported in all

>     analytics databases. For example none of BigQuery \cite{bigquery}, Redshift

Author: clarify that they are syntactic sugar and emulatable in sql

    \cite{redshift}, or Azure Synapse \cite{synapse}, support them.
    DuckDB \cite{duckdb}, Clickhouse \cite{clickhouse}, and Snowflake \cite{snowflake} all do.

    Regardless of whether an engine has explicit support for as-of joins, there
    are complexities with putting SQL in front of the user and telling them to
    write complex N-way as-of joins. First, while the robotics developer may have
    some basic SQL experience, they are not a SQL expert, and particularly if the
    dialect does not support explicit as-of joins the queries can become
    extremely complex. Although one workable option is to hire SQL experts to
    interface between the database and the robotics developer, one of dp3's
    experimental goals is to avoid this solution and attempt instead to empower

>     the robotics developer directly. Second, analytics databases are not

Reviewer 2: If this is one of the motivations of dp3, can we indicate this somewhere previously? This project has lots of potential, but I feel that the motivations are a bit scattered in the paper

    general-purpose databases and often have non-obvious performance footguns and
    tricks that you need to understand to really use them effectively. A typical
    user with basic SQL experience has usually gained that experience from a
    general purpose RDBMS, and may be aggravated to find that the SQL
    implementation of an analytics DBMS comes with a host of unwritten guidance
    along the lines of \q{don't use joins} or \q{manually push down where
    clauses}, or that join algorithms must be directly specified. SQL knowledge
    is portable to a degree, but perhaps less than might initially appear.

    In dp3 we try to reduce the surface for confusion with a more concise and

>     narrowly-scoped query language specifically targeted at expressing as-of

Author: reword this. In dp3 we target a narrower language feature set with explicit focus on ergonomic as-of join support.

    barrier to instead compiling to e.g Clickhouse SQL in a way that
    transparently handles the quirks of Clickhouse for the user and results in a
    statement that should execute efficiently. This could be a useful extension
    strategy for a platform built on dp3.

    \section{Implementation}
    \subsection{Program architecture}
    \begin{figure}
      \begin{forest}
        for tree={
          draw,
          semithick,
          minimum height = 3ex,
          minimum width = 2em,
          grow = south,
          forked edge,
          s sep = 3mm,
          l sep = 6mm,
          fork sep = 3mm,
        }
        [router
        [treemgr
        [rootmap
        [sql]]
        [versionstore
        [sql]]
        [walmgr
        [disk]]
        [nodestore
        [cache]
        [S3]]]]
      \end{forest}
      \caption{Component structure of dp3}
      \label{modstructure}
    \end{figure}

    The component structure of dp3 is depicted in \autoref{modstructure}. This
    section will briefly outline the main data flows, and the following sections
    will explain components in greater detail.

>     \subsubsection{Write (import) path}

Author: I don't like import in here, I think that was from some previous feedback. Want to remove it now.

    On the write path, the router receives an MCAP data stream and passes it into
    the tree manager, which splits it into per-topic MCAP-format buffers in memory,
    while parsing the messages and computing statistics. Buffers are flushed into
    the WAL as they either fill leaf page widths or exceed a configurable size

>     threshold, or on full consumption of the input.

Reviewer 2: --> "a configurable size threshold is exceeded or the input is fully consumed" (No need to say that a leaf page width is filled if threshold for writing back is variable-length and configurable?)

    The WAL manager monitors data outstanding in WAL for both size and time since
    last update. When the outstanding data of a stream exceeds a size threshold, or
    when the stream has not received a new write within a configurable amount of
    time, leaf pages from the WAL are merged into a copy-on-write tree overlay, and

>     written into storage as a single object. This serves to somewhat decouple

Reviewer 2: ~somewhat~

    storage write dimensions from the user’s recording pattern: if the user is
    recording a lot of small files, we will batch data from multiple input files
    into larger storage writes.

    Following a successful write to storage, the location of the root, along with a
    version from the version store, and the server’s timestamp, are written to the
    rootmap database.

    \subsubsection{Read path}
    On the read path, the router receives a request as a string in the dp3 query

>     language. The query is parsed and then transformed into an iterator-style

Reviewer 2: ~then~

    execution plan, with a root location retrieved from the tree manager for each
    topic involved in the query. Scan nodes are instantiated with a timerange and a
    filter expression and are executed by walking the relevant tree leaves and
    applying the filter. Leaf nodes are structured as linked lists and sometimes
    have multiple \q{insert} and \q{delete range} operations, which the
    scan operator resolves into a set of file read and merge operations.

    Node lookups go through the nodestore, with a read-through byte-capacity
    bounded LRU cache of inner nodes. If the important inner nodes of the tree are
    in the cache, then the only reads from storage are those for the leaf data.

    After streaming through the tree of query operators, records are written out

>     to the user in a single topic-multiplexed MCAP data stream.

Author: Add a short section describing how concurrency is handled.

    \subsection{Public API}
    The public API of dp3 consists of the following core operations:

    \textbf{Import(database string, producer string, objectID string)} imports an
    object from storage on behalf of a producer by telling dp3 a location from
    which to read. The term \q{producer} is intentionally vague: it is up to the
    user to decide whether to associate producers with \q{devices} or
    \q{simulation runs} or another internal concept. dp3 supports multiple
    logical databases within a single instance, and operations must be scoped

>     with a database.

Reviewer 2: "with" --> was "within" intended here?

    returns results in MCAP format.

    \textbf{StatRange(database string, producer string, topic string, start
    uint64, end uint64, granularity int)} returns a range of field-level
    statistical aggregations at a granularity at least as granular as the one
    requested. These statistics are stored in the inner nodes of the tree, so
    under optimal circumstances StatRange queries should mostly be served from
    RAM.

    \textbf{Delete(database string, producer string, topic string, start uint64,
    end uint64)} performs a logical deletion of data between two timestamps.
    Physically this is an insert of a \q{mask} rather than a true delete.
    Physical deletion is handled by storage retention policies only.

    \textbf{Truncate(database string, producer string, topic string, timestamp
    uint64)} perform a logical data truncation at a particular timestamp. This
    makes data inserted prior to that timestamp unreachable by read requests. To
    prevent reads from accessing deleted files, it is necessary to truncate
    tables prior to the time when storage retention policies would delete their

>     objects.

Author: this doesn't mention the "messages since version" API, and that doesn't mesh well with query. It might be worth a separate item to explain.

    \subsection{Multigranular tree}
    The core storage structure of dp3 is a versioned, time-partitioned,
    copy-on-write tree. One tree is stored for each producer/topic combination.
    Internally we refer to this combination as a \q{table}, however the user deals
    only with producers and topics. Trees are constructed based on a start and end
    time, branching factor, and target leaf width in seconds. The constructor then
    picks a height that results in a tree satisfying the dimensional constraints.

>     The height obtained by a default tree is 5.

Reviewer 2: "obtained by" --> "of"?

    Truncating the table ensures that no reader will access deleted objects after
    storage lifecycle policies physically reap the files. Truncation must be
    scheduled by the administrator to stay ahead of the lifecycle policy-initiated
    deletion.

    \subsubsection{Range-based deletion and overlapping inserts}
    In addition to truncation from the tail of the tree, we support the ability to
    delete messages from an arbitrary time range. Range-based deletion is
    accomplished with a combination of two strategies. Any tree node impacted in a
    deletion scenario is either fully or partly covered. If a node is fully covered
    by the deletion, the partial tree created by the DeleteRange function will omit
    the node and include a tombstone indicator in the corresponding location in its
    parent’s child array. This rule can be applied down the tree until we are left
    with the case of partially-split leaf nodes to resolve.

    We implement leaf nodes using a linked list structure. The node has a header
    prior to the start of the data that includes an ancestor node ID and version,
    as well as an ancestor delete and end time.

>     If the ancestor node ID is zero, there is no ancestor. Otherwise, the header

Author: all zero/all zero bytes

    how the data should be parsed: \textbf{Insert} contains a serialized partial
    tree covering one leaf node.  \textbf{MergeRequest} contains a list of insert
    record addresses that should be merged as a batch into storage, as well as a
    UUID-format batch ID.  \textbf{MergeComplete} records the completion of a
    merge operation into storage by batch ID.

    On startup, the WAL manager scans all outstanding WAL files in the WAL
    directory, replaying their records through its accounting until it arrives at a
    final state representing unmerged work in the WAL. Thereafter, writes to the
    WAL are accounted for in memory and this state is used for scheduling of
    flushes to storage.

    Garbage collection of the WAL is handled with a process that polls the
    in-memory state of the WAL manager to determine if any files on disk are no
    longer referenced. Any such files are deleted.

    \subsection{Rootmap}
    The rootmap fronts a database of root locations used by the tree manager. Every
    write that is finalized to storage records a write to the rootmap, and every
    read from dp3 (when operating in server mode) does a read from the rootmap.

>     While the rootmap is technically rebuildable from storage operations, it is

Author: by listing objects and reading final bytes

    gets a root for in a database a table at a version.

    \textbf{GetLatestByTopic(database string, producer string, topics
    map[string]uint64)} gets the latest roots in a database for a set of tables.
    The passed map of topics indicates minimum tree versions for each topic.

    \textbf{GetHistorical(database string, producer string, topic string)} gets
    all root versions in the database for a single table.

    \textbf{Put(database string, producer string, topic string, version uint64,
    nodeID nodeID)} inserts a new root into the rootmap.

    One dp3 instance can contain multiple logical \q{databases}, allowing users to
    segregate simulation data from real-world data or maintain other such
    divisions. All operations against the rootmap are therefore scoped with a
    logical database identifier.

    Today, dp3 uses SQLite for the rootmap.

    \subsection{Versionstore}
    For a single tree, writes must be versioned in monotonically increasing order
    to support range deletion as well as querying for new data since a prior read.

    The version store is backed by a persistent counter, from which

>     reservations of one billion versions are taken at a time. On startup, a dp3

Reviewer: a couple more instances of billion in this section

    first RHS value to be returned for each LHS. Without the immediate modifier,
    all matches will be returned.

    \subsection{Client interface}
    The dp3 binary includes both the server and a command-line interface for
    interacting with dp3. That interface includes various functions for
    introspecting the storage, such as the \q{treeinspect} and
    \q{walinspect} commands, as well as a session-oriented interpreter-style
    interface similar to psql (from Postgres) or to sqlite3 \cite{sqlite}. From the client
    interface it is possible to list tables, view statistics, and run interactive
    queries.

    Communication between client and server is over an HTTP API, with custom HTTP
    headers in use to transmit the versions of streamed tables down to the client
    during query operations. We view this API as fairly ad-hoc and temporary, and
    intend to either firm it up or switch to grpc once we are in a better position
    to evaluate.

    \section{Discussion}

    \subsection{Related Work}
    The copy-on-write tree structure of dp3 borrows heavily from btrdb, a
    timeseries database for storing streams of high-frequency univariate floats.

>     Comparing the two, btrdb is more of a \q{pure} timeseries database with a

Author: remove the description as pure, who knows what that means

Author: also cite btrdb here if removed in the opening lines

    with dp3 and btrdb, it seems logical in deployment scenarios to cache the
    upper nodes of the tree.

    The primary intent of Iceberg is to enable multiple database engines to
    operate against the same data safely at the same time, but as a useful
    side-effect of having data in Iceberg format you gain the ability to use an
    off-the-shelf database engine for free, and the potential for pluggable
    integrations in the future if more databases add support for external Iceberg
    tables, as Snowflake has recently done. In addition, dp3 may at some point
    want to have multiple engines operating at the same time, for instance if we
    were able to integrate with Spark SQL. These possibilities make Iceberg a
    worthwhile direction to explore as backing storage for dp3. In comparing the
    two, Iceberg stands out for its far more developed SQL and transactional
    capabilities, while dp3 is distinguished in supporting message storage and
    playback in the user's native choice of recording format, without on-the-fly
    transcoding during read. dp3 also has a more granular time index due to

>     having a deeper tree.

Reviewer 2: Wondering why Iceberg takes up more space here than btrdb. Is this intended? Hasn't the project been more closely aligned with btrdb?

    The query language and goals of dp3 bear similarity to query languages and
    systems previously developed in the areas of \q{stream databases} and
    \q{sequence databases}, such as CQL \cite{cql}, the GSQL language for the
    Gigascope database \cite{gigascope}, Aurora \cite{aurora}, and SEQUIN for

>     the SEQ system. These languages are broadly SQL-like with a focus on

Author: sequin is not cited

    support for merging and as-of join operations, although those go by
    different names.

    CQL has a focus on continuous queries over unbounded data streams. CQL
    supports a \q{sliding window join} with the syntax 

    \begin{lstlisting}
    Select Istream(*)
    From S1 [Range 5 seconds], S2 [Range 10 seconds]
    Where S1.A = S2.A
    \end{lstlisting}

    in this example, a tuple from S1 will be sent to the output if it joins with
    a tuple in S2 from within a 10-second sliding window, and a tuple from S2 will
    be sent if it joins with a 5-second sliding window from S1.

    dp3 does not support this kind of bidirectional windowing today, but this
    query is pretty similar to what dp3 would express as

    \begin{lstlisting}
    from my-device
    S1 precedes S2 by less than 10 seconds
    where S1.field = "foo"
    and S2.field = "bar"
    \end{lstlisting}

    The concept of joining columns between tables in dp3 is not presumed to make
    sense today, because the fields of different tables are typically
    incomparable. However, support for this may become important as we develop
    more focus on subqueries.

>     Continuous queries are also not supported in dp3 today, however support

Reviewer 2: --> "; however, support would not require much work."
Should we mention this in our feature development plans if not mentioned already?

    make it simple to offer a \q{tail} operator as an alternative to scan,
    which will run continuously and watch the tree root for new tuples as they
    come in. The rest of the query plan should remain the same.

    In the SEQUIN language for the SEQ \cite{seq} database, an as-of join is expressed in
    this way:

    \begin{lstlisting}
    // first define the moving average as a view
    CREATE VIEW MovAvgStockl AS (
    PROJECT avg(C.high) as avghigh
    FROM stock1 c
    OVER \$P-23 TO \$p.);

    // then use the view in the query
    PROJECT A.avghigh - B.high
    FROM MovAvgStockl A,
    Previous(PROJECT D.high
    FROM Stock2 D
    WHERE D.volume > 25,000) B
    WHERE.\$P > 2000;
    \end{lstlisting}

    The \textit{Previous} function returns the most recent hour at a point during
    evaluation when the volume on Stock2 exceeded 25,000. In dp3 we have no support
    for aggregations at this time, so we are unable to compute the moving average
    represented in the view. In dp3, \q{Previous} is implemented with \q{precedes
    immediate}.

    \subsection{Work remaining}
    Significant work remains, both in design validation and feature development, to

>     get dp3 to a useful state.

Author: expand this to summarize the current state of dp3's implementation

    \subsubsection{Design validation}
    The largest outstanding design question relates to dp3’s choice to use MCAP
    as the data format in leaf storage. There are a few benefits to this
    choice: (1) No transcoding required on ingestion or query. (2)
    Automatically compatible with user’s own internal tooling. (3) Streaming
    playback is a row-oriented workload. (4) Automatically compatible with
    common robotics recording workflows

    There are also drawbacks, primarily in the performance department. (1)
    Columnar storage would realize better compression in general. (2) A
    standard columnar format may allow us to leverage an off-the-shelf query
    executor, and could probably support more performant queries for our search
    workload. (3) Building generic systems on MCAP requires supporting query
    operations on multiple different binary encoding formats in place, which is

>     tedious to implement and support, and may carry some performance risks.

Reviewer 2: Nice acknowledgment of design cons!

    The question is also complicated by workload-specific factors. If a
    columnar format is used, it is likely that small \q{row groups} or whatever

>     equivalent concept exists will be required, to enable queries to merge

Reviewer 2: "(or whatever equivalent concept exists)" (surrounding in brackets would help)

>     large numbers of tables at once without using huge amounts of memory. Using

Reviewer 2: "huge" -> Can we quantify/describe more clearly?

    small row groups will tend to work against the interests of good OLAP
    performance on the data files, obviating some of the benefits we would be
    hoping to get with the columnar format.

    Furthermore, a significant portion of the heavy read volume the database will
    serve for ML purposes, will be image and point-cloud data. In these kinds of

>     messages, there is effectively one column: a giant byte array. This means that

Reviewer 2: "giant" --> Same concern as above

    row-oriented and columnar files for these kinds of data are physically pretty

>     similar. So intuitively, it seems like the performance benefits we would hope

Reviewer 2: "Intuitively," "it seems," "we would hope," "mostly," "perhaps less," etc. are subjective claims that are especially weak when paired together (as in this sentence). Can we omit or more clearly describe/quantify these?

    to see may accrue mostly to the robotics developer’s log history searches, and
    perhaps less to the ML developer's heavy read workloads.

    The best way to resolve all these questions seems like an implementation spike
    and some benchmarks. Parquet is an obvious candidate for a columnar format to
    test. The LanceDB project is another one that is focused on some of the more
    exotic kinds of searches users might be interested in, such as image similarity
    search. Once we have a good sense of how all the options perform, we can choose
    the best option and have a strong rationale.

    A second area where outstanding questions exist is whether the structure we
    have, with the statistics we can attach, is really sufficient to accelerate the
    kinds of queries users want to run to be fast enough for a good user
    experience. To get a better feel for this we will need to incorporate more
    statistics and then get some users to evaluate.

    \subsubsection{Feature development}

>     Assorted major feature development priorities are listed below.

Reviewer 2: Not necessary to mention these are assorted, can write that we intend to develop the below (instead of saying we must develop them)?
